Written by Charles Dickens, a Realist British writer of the 19th century Victorian era, Hard Times is a critical examination of the then-English educational system, which was characterized by rigidity and conventional rationalism, thereby eliminating the need for critical thinking and imagination. The characters in the chapters are used to convey the idea that excessive mechanization of the human mind can be destructive to the vitality of the soul and can dehumanize humans.

Chapter 1 introduces us to the character of Mr. Thomas Gradgrind without naming him directly, but rather describing him and the ambience around him as rigid and mechanical by emphasising on the word “square” multiple times. Chapter 1 describes Mr. Gradgrind as dictatorial and inflexible. By repeatedly using the word "facts" in the monologue, it is explained how facts and rationale are all that matter to Gradgrind, with no room for creativity and imagination.

In Chapter 2, Gradgrind shows the mode of definition for a horse as an insight into his stubbornly fact-obsessed mind. He berates the usage of the shortened name "Sissy" of a girl named Cecilia Jupe and directly critiques her father for naming her such. He asks her the definition of a horse, which she is unable to do. Then, he points his finger at a fact-oriented boy named Bitzer, who had memorised the definition of a horse so perfectly and with such precision that it illustrated how mechanical the educational setting of that period in England was. Then, we’re introduced to characters such as an unnamed government official who, much like  Mr. Gradgrind, prefers "papering" something rather than "painting" it and prefers "facts" over "fancying something". At the last part of the chapter, we are introduced to Mr. M’Choakumchild, another schoolmaster with a heavily mechanised mind to the point of having stuffed himself with the statistical knowledge of orthography, etymology, syntax, astronomy, geography, algebra, French, German, Latin, Greek, all the rivers, mountains, histories, customs of all people etc., so much so that the mode delivery of his teaching was too mechanical and rigid. 