Written by William Wordsworth, a famous poet from the Romantic age of poetry, The Preface to The Lyrical Ballads serves as a manifesto for Romantic poetry, outlining Wordsworth’s revolutionary approach using a compilation of poems written by him and his close friend Samuel Coleridge as a result of confluence. In Preface To The Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth explains the theme, language and subject matter of poetry. He says that, in this poem, he has described incidents and situations from daily life because feelings and emotions can be expressed in a simple, rural life. Thus, Wordsworth professes his opinion that poetry should deal with natural surroundings. 

On top of it, the definition of poetry and the role of the poet in the Preface to The Lyrical Ballads has also been given a more substantial definition. Wordsworth claims that rural and uncomplicated life is closer to nature. His poems draw from “low and rustic life” and use the diction of the common people to convey universal human truths. The language of the common people possesses universal prevalence and the essence of being evergreen. Hence, in the Preface to The Lyrical Ballads, he says that the poems in the Lyrical Ballads are supposed to be different from the traditional poetry of the Neo-Classical age, which was artificial and decorative.

In the Preface to The Lyrical Ballads, he has tried to defend a new kind of poetry which opposed the status quo of the pre-established Neo-Classical norms. In addition, Wordsworth has used the voice of a common man in his work because simple language always appeals to the mind and heart. Wordsworth, himself, admits that his poetry belongs to the common man and not to the ruling classes, aristocracy and nobility. There is no doubt that Wordsworth’s ideas were criticized by various critics, but even then, his ideas are very significant and valuable. That is why the Preface To The Lyrical Ballads is rightly called the manifesto of Romanticism or the Romantic age.