Written by William Blake, a Romantic poet of the 18th century, The Chimney Sweeper explores themes of religious hypocrisy and social injustice through the words of a suffering child. Blake’s Christian upbringing influences his works and makes it the centre of his work. The word/s "soot" and "little black thing among the snow" are used to present an imagery of a child exploited for cheap labour of sweeping chimneys. He is too young to fully understand why he must suffer, yet he is forced to work in dangerous and unhealthy environments. There is also an exploration of the aforementioned child’s tragic cries that he expresses as a result of the labour that is forced upon him. While the child is burdened with industrial labour, the grievance towards the child’s parents' apathy and their appeasement to the Church and the State is also expressed. 

The poem also lets us know that before the child’s involvement in the laborious work of sweeping the chimney, the child was happy and joyful. The child also used to enjoy the winter snow. The snow is white and pure, while the child is covered in black soot. This contrast highlights the loss of innocence. It shows how a pure and innocent child is dirtied and damaged by harsh labour and cruel working conditions. Then, there is also a direct criticism of the Church and State in "who make up a heaven of misery," presenting an imagery of false promises of salvation. Church and State, here, represent the religious power and the power of the king at the time. 

In this poem, themes of religious dogma are discussed, and social evils such as child labour are explored. Blake suggests that the parents are comforted by religious ideas instead of facing the reality of their child’s pain. Blake perfectly layers innocence and moral compass with systematic oppression and human compassion turned into apathy.
